Now that you have the basic
idea of steganography,
it's time to learn a bit about binary.
So you can do the math on
the numeric values of pixels.
Let's start with a refresher
on base ten numbers,
the normal decimal
system you use everyday.
In a base ten number, the digits
are in the 1s place, the 10s place,
the 100s place, and so on.
This means that a number like 8,237 is
7*1 plus 3*10 plus 2*100 plus 8*1000.
The same principles apply in binary but
the places are powers of two
instead of powers of ten.
Computers do this because they
fundamentally work with electric circuits
and transistors which are easiest to
implement with two voltage levels.
So, computers work naturally in a number
system where you have only two values,
ones and zeros.
So the binary number 10111,
one is 1 * 1 plus 1 * 2 plus 1 * 4
plus 0 * 8 plus 1 * 16, which,
if you wrote in decimal, would be 23.
The red, green, and blue components
of pixels range from 0 to 255
because they are stored with
eight binary digits called bits.
Note that the b in bit comes from binary,
and the it in bit comes from digit.
With eight digits, or eight bits,
a number can range from 0000 0000,
which is the decimal number 0,
to 1111 1111, which is decimal 255.
These eight bits are in the 1's place,
the 2's place, and so
on up through the 128's place.
If you were to add up all these
place values, you would get 255.
Now that you know that each color
is an eightbit binary number,
let's revisit this steganography problem.
You want to hide the eight-bit
number on the left,
10110010 in the number on the right,
01110101.
As before,
you'll hide the most significant digits.
In this case,
you use the four digits from each number,
since that's half of the total digits.
The resulting number would be this eight
bit binary number, where we've colored
the bits based on which of the two
original numbers they came from.
The most significant bits from the number
you want to hide shown in blue
are now hidden as the least significant
bits of the color that will be displayed.
That's how you do it conceptually, but
how do you pull these numbers apart and
then put them back together using
mathematical operations that
you can write down in code?
Let's again revisit the problem in the
more familiar context of decimal numbers.
Working similar problems in more familiar
contexts can be a great strategy in
general whenever you're approaching
problems that have unfamiliar concepts.
The first question we might ask is,
how do you extract or
get 82, the blue digits out of 8, 274?
The number on the left, or
the 82, is underlined in blue.
You could take 8274 and divide by 100.
That would give you 82.74.
And then throw away the 0.74.
The mathematical operation called
taking the floor of a number,
which means rounding it down to the whole
number, less than or equal to it.
In JavaScript, you would do this
with Math.floor(8274 / 100), and
that would give you 82.
The same principle works to get the most
significant two digits of 3,568.
Math.floor(3568 / 100) is 35.
In fact, you can get rid of the least
significant digits of any base ten number
by dividing by the appropriate power of
ten and discarding the fractional part.
Now that you have 82 and 35, you want
to put them together to get 3,582,
which you can do simply by
multiplying 35 by 100 and adding 82.
In fact,
this strategy works to combine any two
digit numbers into a four digit number.
If you wanted to combine numbers
with more or fewer digits,
you would multiply by
a different power of 10.
Now, let's go back to the numbers
represented in binary.
You can apply the same principle but
now you'll need to use powers
of two instead of powers of 10.
And since we want to work with four
digits at a time, we'll use 2 to the 4th,
which is 16.
So if you took Math.floor(10110010
/ 16) you would get 1011.
Note that there's nothing really
special about binary math.
Binary numbers are still just numbers,
in fact,
this really is 178 divided
by 16 which is equal to 11.
We just wrote the numbers down
in binary rather than decimal.
Similarly, to get the most significant
four bits of the other number,
you can divide by 16, and
take Math.floor of the result.
In this case,
you're taking 117 dividing by 16 to get 7.
Now, you can combine the two
different four bit numbers
into one eight bit number with the same
principle we saw before with base 10.
But this time, instead of multiplying by
a 100, you multiply by 16 and then add.
That's the math required to
hide one image in another.
But what about the math to
extract the hidden image?.
How do you get the least significant four
digits out of the number on the right,
shown in blue,
to make them into the most significant
four digits of the number on the left?
Let's again go back to the more
familiar base 10 scenario.
When you take 3582 and divide by 100,
you get 35, with a remainder of 82.
That 82, the remainder when you divide,
is exactly what you want.
So how to you ask JavaScript to give
you the remainder that's left over
when you use division?
You use the percent sign operator,
show here.
3582 % 100 is 82.
The percent sign operator is called mod,
short for modulus,
the formal mathematical name for
the remainder when you divide.
So, we'd actually read this
statement as 3582 mod 100 is 82.
Once you have these two digits, you can
just multiply by 100 to get the number you
want, making them the two most significant
digits of the resulting four digit number.
The same principle will work for
binary digits.
But again, you use powers of
two instead of powers of ten.
Since you want four digits, you would use
2 to the 4th, which is 16, instead of 100.
Taking a number mod 16 gives you
the four least significant or
right most bits, the binary digits.
In this case, 1011.
If you take that number and
multiply by 16, you
end up with these bits as the four most
significant bits of an eight bit number.
You see that the leftmost, or
most significant bits, are now 1011.
That's exactly the math you
need to extract a hidden image.
So now you've seen how numbers
are represented in binary and
how you can extract the digits you
want from numbers in base 10 or
in the base 2 using either division or
mod.
You've seen how you can combine this
digits back together in either based using
multiplication and addition.
And you've seen that you can use
Math.floor to discard the fractional parts
after you've divided.
We've summarized these
ideas on this slide.
Remember, think about
numbers in base 10 but
do the math in base 2 by using
powers of 2 instead of powers of 10.
Enjoy your programming.